This is a Google Summer of Code 2007 project.

Bayesian filtering is a powerful machine learning tool frequently used in spam detection. The basic idea is that every word has different possibility to appear in a spam or innocent email. If an email contains lots of word usually appear only in spam email, we can say that this email is probably a spam too. Bayesian filter plays an important role in SpamAssassin. With Bayesian filter activated, SpamAssassin is more adaptive and accurate than using static rule alone.

However, unintentional or intentional noise could circumvent Bayesian filter (http://bnr.nuclearelephant.com). In unintentional case, it is normal that some common words appear in both spam and legitimate email, which makes spam emails look somewhat similar to legitimate emails. In SpamAssassin, stop words list is used to exclude some common words (http://wiki.apache.org/spamassassin/BayesStopList). However, the stop word list is small and static. There is still much noise after excluding these stop words. Furthermore, spam mail writer could intentionally inject some words which only appear in legitimate emails. In that, Bayesian filter will be deceived and misclassify a spam as a legitimate email.

Dobly Bayesian Noise Reduction (BNR) is a preprocessing step to eliminate these noises from email before presenting them to Bayesian filter. The basic idea of BNR is to remove two different types of words from the email. First, words which are not differential between spam and legitimate email will be removed. This indicates that these words are merely common words. Second, words which are not consistent with the context will be removed. These words are probably intentionally injected. Instead of using words as basic unit, BNR focus on a word group called context. The representation of the context is based on the Bayesian score associated with each word in the group. BNR will remove a word if the context of the word is not useful to differentiate spam and legitimate email or the score of context is significantly deviate from the word itself. Result shows that BNR will increase the accuracy of Bayesian filter by a wide margin.

BNR is a feature of DSPAM system (http://dspam.nuclearelephant.com) and there is a reference implementation of BNR alone (http://bnr.nuclearelephant.com). This project is to add BNR into SpamAssassin in a proper way. The goal is to add extra accuracy into Bayesian filter with no significant penalty to performance and also keep the administrative burden in a minimal level. Benchmark data will be given to show the performance of BNR.